README.md, before:

# rustims

<p align="center">
  <img src="rustims_logo.png" alt="logo" width="250"/>
</p>

`rustims` is a framework developed for processing raw data from Ion-Mobility Spectrometry (IMS) in [prote]omics mass spectrometry. This project emerged from my Ph.D. research and reflects our involvement in [MSCORESYS](https://www.mscoresys.de/), especially within the [DIASYM](https://diasym.mscoresys.de/) segment. RustIMS draws inspiration from OpenMS but is distinguished by its use of [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) as the backend language, aiming for efficient algorithm implementations and robust data structures. Like OpenMS, rustims exposes most of its logic to Python via [pyO3](https://docs.rs/pyo3/latest/pyo3/). This setup is intended to enable quick prototyping and integration into existing scientific workflows.

# Overview
If you're diving into the realm of ion-mobility mass spectrometry raw data, rustims might offer valuable insights and tools. It could be a fitting project if you:

* Have an interest in the **processing of raw IMS data**.
* Are curious about the **algorithms** behind IMS data processing.
* Have a basic understanding of **programming** concepts.
* Don't mind engaging with a **project that's still evolving**.

rustims is about exploring and improving the way we process ion-mobility spectrometry data. It's a work in progress, reflecting the open-source ethos of collaboration, engagement, and sharing of knowledge. Whether you're here to contribute or learn, we welcome your interest!


# Quickstart
To quickly get started, we recommend installing the Python package `imspy` via pip into a separate Virtual
Environment using Python3.11 (currently the only supported Python version due to TensorFlow). If you don't know how to create a Virtual Environment, you can follow the instructions [here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html).
This way, you can avoid potential dependency conflicts with other Python packages.
The following command installs the latest version of `imspy` from PyPi:
```shell
pip install imspy
```

## Analyzing a DDA dataset from Bruker timsTOF with imspy_dda
You can directly run the `imspy_dda` command to analyze a DDA dataset:
```shell
imspy_dda path/to/bruker.tdf path/to/proteome.fasta
```
The tool has a lot of options, which you can explore by running:
```shell
imspy_dda --help
```

## Generating a synthetic PASEF-like dataset with timsim
You can also generate a synthetic PASEF-like dataset using the following command (timsim currently requires a reference.tdf file of a real dataset):
```shell
timsim path/to/output.tdf path/to/reference.tdf path/to/proteome.fasta
```
The tool has a lot of options, which you can explore by running:
```shell
timsim --help
```

# Repository Structure
<figure align="center">
  <img src="rustims_layout.png" alt="RustIMS Project Structure" width="700"/>
  <figcaption>
    The <em>rustims</em> project architecture is designed around two core Rust crates: 
    <code>mscore</code> and <code>rustdf</code>. These crates are the foundation of the project, 
    housing the in-memory data structures, algorithms, and input/output functionalities 
    specifically for TDF files. These Rust components are seamlessly integrated with Python 
    through <code>pyO3</code>, which allows the main functionalities of <code>mscore</code> 
    and <code>rustdf</code> to be accessible in Python by compiling them into a single, 
    installable Python wheel named <code>imspy_connector</code>. On top of this, 
    <code>imspy</code> is a native Python package that not only interfaces with the Rust 
    crates for enhanced performance but also introduces additional logic, such as TensorFlow 
    models for ion-mobility prediction, thereby combining the strengths of Rust and Python in 
    one cohesive framework.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Rust backend: mscore and rustdf
There are two Rrust projects: `mscore` and `rustdf`. The former is a library that contains implementations of in-memory data structures and algorithms for raw-data processing. The latter contains a Rust-native reader and writer of TDF, the serialization format written by [Bruker timsTOF](https://www.bruker.com/en/products-and-solutions/mass-spectrometry/timstof.html) devices. It also contains the implementation of the I/O logic needed for synthetic timsTOF PASEF-like in-silico dataset generation.

## Python bindings: imspy_connector
The `imspy_connector` module bridges Rust code with Python, allowing Rust components to be used in Python with minimal dependencies. This setup keeps the system lightweight for Python users but introduces complexity, especially in development and debugging. Changes in Rust need to be reflected in Python, often requiring updates in multiple places. Despite the added complexity, this architecture is chosen for its benefits. It allows for parts of the code in Rust or Python that don't interact with the other language to be developed independently and asynchronously. However, this flexibility is limited to components that do not require cross-language access.

## Python package: imspy
`imspy` is a Python package designed for end-users. It utilizes `imspy_connector` for accessing Rust functionalities exposed via `pyO3`, incorporating additional libraries like `tensorflow`, `scikit-learn`, and `sagepy`. This setup enables users to perform detailed tasks such as calculating peptide fragment ions, analyzing isotope patterns, studying quadrupole transmission, and applying deep learning to ion mobility and retention time predictions. `imspy` serves those who require advanced analytical capabilities within the Python environment for proteomics research.

## Julia bindings
Julia support is currently experimental. Julia interfaces via `imsjl_connector`, [FFI](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/ffi.html).

# Installation

## Install via pip
We are now providing stable versions of the python-bound components via Python wheels on PyPi. We recommend that you use a [Python virtual environment](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) with `python3.11`, since imspy has some heavy weight dependencies like `tensorflow`, `numpy`, and `numba`, where version mismatches can lead to potential issues.
```shell
pip install imspy
```

## Build from source
## Rust backend
Assuming a [rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/learn/get-started) is installed on your system and you cloned this repository, the build process currently looks like this (example for mscore):
```shell
cd rustims/mscore && cargo build --release
```

## Python bindings
Assuming a [rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/learn/get-started) and Python (==3.11) version is installed on your system, the
build process currently looks like this:

1.  The Python connector `imspy_connector` needs to be built by [Maturin](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin).
    Maturin can be installed via pip:
    ```shell
    pip install maturin[patchelf]
    ```
2.  Once Maturin is installed navigate to the `imspy_connector` folder and run:
    ```shell
    maturin build --release
    ```
    This generates a `.whl` file that can be installed by pip.
3.  Install the generated `.whl` file:
    ```shell
    pip install --force-reinstall ./target/wheels/[FILE_NAME].whl
    ```
    The `--force-reinstall` flag ensures that pip is overwriting old installations of the bindings. This
    is relevant when you make changes in the rust backend code (i.e. the bindings themselves, `mscore` or `rustdf`).
    
## Julia bindings
Julia support is currently experimental.

## Python package
The Python library is installed via [Poetry](https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry).
1.  Poetry can be installed via pip:
    ```shell
    pip install poetry
    ```
2.  Navigate to the `imspy` folder and install it with Poetry.
    ```shell
    poetry install
    ```

Commit message:

adding description of additional CUDA support for tensorflow

README.md, after:

# rustims

<p align="center">
  <img src="rustims_logo.png" alt="logo" width="250"/>
</p>

`rustims` is a framework developed for processing raw data from Ion-Mobility Spectrometry (IMS) in [prote]omics mass spectrometry. This project emerged from my Ph.D. research and reflects our involvement in [MSCORESYS](https://www.mscoresys.de/), especially within the [DIASYM](https://diasym.mscoresys.de/) segment. RustIMS draws inspiration from OpenMS but is distinguished by its use of [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) as the backend language, aiming for efficient algorithm implementations and robust data structures. Like OpenMS, rustims exposes most of its logic to Python via [pyO3](https://docs.rs/pyo3/latest/pyo3/). This setup is intended to enable quick prototyping and integration into existing scientific workflows.

# Overview
If you're diving into the realm of ion-mobility mass spectrometry raw data, rustims might offer valuable insights and tools. It could be a fitting project if you:

* Have an interest in the **processing of raw IMS data**.
* Are curious about the **algorithms** behind IMS data processing.
* Have a basic understanding of **programming** concepts.
* Don't mind engaging with a **project that's still evolving**.

rustims is about exploring and improving the way we process ion-mobility spectrometry data. It's a work in progress, reflecting the open-source ethos of collaboration, engagement, and sharing of knowledge. Whether you're here to contribute or learn, we welcome your interest!


# Quickstart
To quickly get started, we recommend installing the Python package `imspy` via pip into a separate Virtual
Environment using Python3.11 (currently the only supported Python version due to TensorFlow). If you don't know how to create a Virtual Environment, you can follow the instructions [here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html).
This way, you can avoid potential dependency conflicts with other Python packages.
The following command installs the latest version of `imspy` from PyPi:
```shell
pip install imspy
```
This will install tensorflow as a dependency without GPU support.
The easiest way to get GPU support is to additionally install the tensorflow[and-cuda] package:
```shell
pip install tensorflow[and-cuda]==2.15.0.post1
```
Which comes with the necessary CUDA and cuDNN libraries.

## Analyzing a DDA dataset from Bruker timsTOF with imspy_dda
You can directly run the `imspy_dda` command to analyze a DDA dataset:
```shell
imspy_dda path/to/bruker.tdf path/to/proteome.fasta
```
The tool has a lot of options, which you can explore by running:
```shell
imspy_dda --help
```

## Generating a synthetic PASEF-like dataset with timsim
You can also generate a synthetic PASEF-like dataset using the following command (timsim currently requires a reference.tdf file of a real dataset):
```shell
timsim path/to/output.tdf path/to/reference.tdf path/to/proteome.fasta
```
The tool has a lot of options, which you can explore by running:
```shell
timsim --help
```

# Repository Structure
<figure align="center">
  <img src="rustims_layout.png" alt="RustIMS Project Structure" width="700"/>
  <figcaption>
    The <em>rustims</em> project architecture is designed around two core Rust crates: 
    <code>mscore</code> and <code>rustdf</code>. These crates are the foundation of the project, 
    housing the in-memory data structures, algorithms, and input/output functionalities 
    specifically for TDF files. These Rust components are seamlessly integrated with Python 
    through <code>pyO3</code>, which allows the main functionalities of <code>mscore</code> 
    and <code>rustdf</code> to be accessible in Python by compiling them into a single, 
    installable Python wheel named <code>imspy_connector</code>. On top of this, 
    <code>imspy</code> is a native Python package that not only interfaces with the Rust 
    crates for enhanced performance but also introduces additional logic, such as TensorFlow 
    models for ion-mobility prediction, thereby combining the strengths of Rust and Python in 
    one cohesive framework.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Rust backend: mscore and rustdf
There are two Rrust projects: `mscore` and `rustdf`. The former is a library that contains implementations of in-memory data structures and algorithms for raw-data processing. The latter contains a Rust-native reader and writer of TDF, the serialization format written by [Bruker timsTOF](https://www.bruker.com/en/products-and-solutions/mass-spectrometry/timstof.html) devices. It also contains the implementation of the I/O logic needed for synthetic timsTOF PASEF-like in-silico dataset generation.

## Python bindings: imspy_connector
The `imspy_connector` module bridges Rust code with Python, allowing Rust components to be used in Python with minimal dependencies. This setup keeps the system lightweight for Python users but introduces complexity, especially in development and debugging. Changes in Rust need to be reflected in Python, often requiring updates in multiple places. Despite the added complexity, this architecture is chosen for its benefits. It allows for parts of the code in Rust or Python that don't interact with the other language to be developed independently and asynchronously. However, this flexibility is limited to components that do not require cross-language access.

## Python package: imspy
`imspy` is a Python package designed for end-users. It utilizes `imspy_connector` for accessing Rust functionalities exposed via `pyO3`, incorporating additional libraries like `tensorflow`, `scikit-learn`, and `sagepy`. This setup enables users to perform detailed tasks such as calculating peptide fragment ions, analyzing isotope patterns, studying quadrupole transmission, and applying deep learning to ion mobility and retention time predictions. `imspy` serves those who require advanced analytical capabilities within the Python environment for proteomics research.

## Julia bindings
Julia support is currently experimental. Julia interfaces via `imsjl_connector`, [FFI](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/ffi.html).

# Installation

## Install via pip
We are now providing stable versions of the python-bound components via Python wheels on PyPi. We recommend that you use a [Python virtual environment](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) with `python3.11`, since imspy has some heavy weight dependencies like `tensorflow`, `numpy`, and `numba`, where version mismatches can lead to potential issues.
```shell
pip install imspy
```

## Build from source
## Rust backend
Assuming a [rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/learn/get-started) is installed on your system and you cloned this repository, the build process currently looks like this (example for mscore):
```shell
cd rustims/mscore && cargo build --release
```

## Python bindings
Assuming a [rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/learn/get-started) and Python (==3.11) version is installed on your system, the
build process currently looks like this:

1.  The Python connector `imspy_connector` needs to be built by [Maturin](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin).
    Maturin can be installed via pip:
    ```shell
    pip install maturin[patchelf]
    ```
2.  Once Maturin is installed navigate to the `imspy_connector` folder and run:
    ```shell
    maturin build --release
    ```
    This generates a `.whl` file that can be installed by pip.
3.  Install the generated `.whl` file:
    ```shell
    pip install --force-reinstall ./target/wheels/[FILE_NAME].whl
    ```
    The `--force-reinstall` flag ensures that pip is overwriting old installations of the bindings. This
    is relevant when you make changes in the rust backend code (i.e. the bindings themselves, `mscore` or `rustdf`).
    
## Julia bindings
Julia support is currently experimental.

## Python package
The Python library is installed via [Poetry](https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry).
1.  Poetry can be installed via pip:
    ```shell
    pip install poetry
    ```
2.  Navigate to the `imspy` folder and install it with Poetry.
    ```shell
    poetry install
    ```
